---
layout : mermaid
title : "Spain visit - day 6 - The twinkle of joy"
date : 2025-07-03
tags : [spain, travels, friendship, poetry]
author : Samrat Kar
---


## Day 5 : Shopping : 7-03-2025 : Thursday 

---

## Feeling homely 

Thank you aunty, thank you sis,  
For joining us and enhancing our celebration!  
Thank you for the long walk, 
Allowing to share little weights,  
And sharing those light moments,  
Exploring the beautiful streets, people, and food.

---

## Your thoughtfulness

Thank you brother,  
For making us feel special,  
Those patient discovering of the eateries,  
Selecting those eclectic vegetarian options,  
In that loving anticipation that we might like them,  
And then when delivered,  
Caring and Anxious anticipation,  
Wondering whether we liked them!  
You are so special, you are so kind!  
You make us feel at home!  

---

## Those light singing and dancing!

Thank you for tapping the feet,  
And waving hands, dancing to the rhythm,
And resonating souls,  
In symphony of joy, 
Binding all of us in the golden thread of love, 
Of belonging and togetherness. 

---

## A twinkle of the jewel of joy

Among the constellation of the twinkles 
Of the jewels of joy,
Embedded all over in the fabric of the 
Beautiful city of night life of Madrid,
There was this little twinkle of joy, 
Very our own, very personal,
That was born, shone, and added to the glory,
The Crowning glory of joy of being alive!
And thank you for making that twinkle shine!
For all we joined, 
From places far and wide,
And we shared, we laughed, we danced,
Reminding that inherent unity of being human,
Bonded with purpose, to make something beautiful,
Inspiring and uplifting, 
For ourselves, for each other, and for the world.

---

